Y'know, I think it's a shame that people talk
about ideology as if it were a dirty word.
I think it's inevitable and really meaningful
and important that we talk about the social
and political dimensions of beliefs, and the
articulation of ideas in a way that's aspirational,
in forming movements for social change, and
that is the realm of ideology. You can try
to change the nomenclature, but, inevitably,
we're going to talk about ideology. Some people
watching this will may not be old enough to
remember what it was like in the 1990s heyday
of phony cynicism that was referred to as
postmodernism, but there was a period of time
when people would say to you, straight to
your face, "Oh! How can you associate your
name with any ideology!?!"
"Any concept that ends with 'ism' is just
terrible and evil."
Anything that ends with "-ism", and y'know...
the shame is that some of my favorite things
in life end with "-ism".
But, y'know, uh, joking aside, it's a sad,
desperate state of affairs when people want
to pretend that, y'know, we're not talking
about ideology when we are.
My feeling, coming out of the 1990s --because
I'm old enough to remember-- was that, y'know,
political ideology had become the equivalent
of the disposable plastic bag. Everybody uses
them, but you've got to keep up the appearance
among the cognoscenti that you never use them.
Y'know, like, when your friends come over,
you can't have disposable plastic bags in
view. If people are going to see you shopping,
you've got to have reusable bags with you.
We're all in denial about the fact that modern
life involves plastic bags, right?
Great comparison, hunh? Where was I going
with this again? Right... ideology.
Um, I sympathize with the debates I see going
on right now that are trying to expand atheism
from being a single-issue-cause to being an
ideology. And I don't mean "ideology" in a
bad sense at all, I mean it in a value-neutral
sense. Um, a really good comparison would
be, in the 1980s --that I can't remember as
well [as the '90s]-- in the 1980s there were
all kinds of anti-nuclear movements that started
off as a single issue cause, [and they said],
"Okay, we're opposed to the nuclear bomb,
maybe [we're] opposed to nuclear power plants,
let's try to gather together the people who
have this one issue in common, and then expand
this into a meaningful social movement."
You try to have a picnic with a whole bunch
of people who are anti-nuclear, you find out
what you have in common, you find out what
you don't have in common, and, yeah, you get
into articulating the ideology: trying to
find common ground.
People become vegetarian, one of the first
experiences is the sense of disappointment
that you have nothing in common with the other
vegetarians you meet, because, as soon as
you become vegetarian, you know what your
own motives are, and then what you learn is:
other people have become vegetarian for different
motives, that are totally incompatible with
your set of motives, and that you may feel
very alienated from other vegetarians.
So, what's the line of reasoning, the line
of questioning that leads you to? It leads
you to question: what is the ideology of vegetarianism?
What are the ideologies, plural, that connect
people with vegetarianism?
And there's a similar questioning that naturally
goes on with atheism in the 21st century,
partly because atheism has expanded as a discourse,
it has been successful, it has had best-selling
books, and popular voices advocating for it.
It has become a leading, notable part of public
discourse, which it wasn't 50 years ago, shall
we say.
Um, so, where do we go from here?
It's interesting, and I sympathize with people
like T.J. ("The Amazing Atheist") and, uh...
Jaclyn Glenn, another Youtube vlogger on atheism,
who, both, within the same month, retreated
to a position of trying to very narrowly define atheism
and of pointing out that they themselves technically
identify as agnostic. You can see their discussion,
their videos, as to why they say that. I sympathize,
but I feel that they're moving in the wrong
direction, because the real challenge for
atheism is to move forward, and to say, no,
this isn't just something that's challenging
one issue, one idea, one problem. This isn't
just about problematizing god. You want to
find the common ground with the other people
who show up at that picnic, and you want to
build something positive, and that inevitably
involves ideology.
To speak very quickly in what I hope is going
to be a short video, what is that ideology
in one word? I think that if we're honest
with ourselves, it's the ideology of nihilism.
Talk about words that people don't want to
use in a positive way, nihilism has a lot
of negative connotations, but what that really
would mean, in contrast to atheism (narrowly defined),
is that we're shifting the focus away from
negating theology, and we're engaging in a
broader questioning of the basis of belief
and the basis of values. And I think, inevitably,
that's where atheism has got to go.